Welcome to session 932,
Performance Tuning
Your Application with Shark.
My name is Wade Tregaskiis.
I work in the Architecture and
Performance group here at Apple.
In this session,
we're going to show you how you
can use Shark to improve the
performance of your applications.
But before we get right
down into how to use Shark,
I'd like to lay the groundwork a bit,
starting with why you're here.
Hopefully,
you're all here for the same reason.
You're about performance.
You want your applications to
be faster and more responsive.
This makes end users happier, of course,
and makes them more productive.
It also gives you room to add
additional features to your
application and enhancements.
Another way of looking at performance,
though, is in terms of power and
economy and efficiency.
Typically,
a program that's more optimized,
that runs faster, uses less power to do
the same amount of work.
This is, of course,
really important today with so
many of our users on portable
devices running off batteries,
where they want to get the most life
out of those batteries for each charge.
In a similar vein,
but at the other end of the spectrum,
you also have your server people who
care about power much the same because
it goes right to their bottom line in
terms of cooling and electricity costs.
So these are the reasons
we care about performance.
So let's look at when you should
start optimizing your application.
If we just consider your
development workflow to start with,
you start out by writing your code,
of course.
Now, for this, you probably use some
high-level tools like Xcode,
Interface Builder, so forth.
And these allow you to write your code,
get it compiling,
and get an application built.
But this isn't an application you'd
probably want to release to end users,
right?
Because it's possibly going to
have some bugs still left in it.
So, of course, you don't.
You first test it and you debug it.
Now,
debugging you can do using just Printf,
right?
But hopefully no one here
is just using Printf.
Hopefully you're using the high-level
tools that we provide that allow
you to do this much more easily.
Things like Xcode with
its GDB integration,
Instruments, malloc-debug, leaks,
and so forth.
What these tools are
about is telling you,
"Okay, not just that a problem occurred,
but where it occurred,
what code was executing,
what your code was
doing when it occurred,
what was leading up to that point."
They basically let you go in and
see what your program was up to
and figure out what's going on.
[Transcript missing]
And they, much the same,
let you get in there and see what
your program is actually doing
and understand what's happening.
And having used these tools,
they give your program
that real final polish,
that real gloss and finish
that users are going to love.
All right, so let's get down to it.
What do you need to do in order
to use Shark with your program?
Technically nothing.
I mean, you can fire up Shark whenever
you feel like it and start
using it on your program,
but there's some things that you should
do in order to get the most out of it.
First up, debug your program.
It's hard enough at times
improving your performance,
let alone if it's not even
working properly to start with.
So worry about getting it working,
and then worry about the speed.
When you do get to the stage where
you want to improve the performance,
you want to be profiling what
end users are going to see,
because that's ultimately
what you care about.
So you want to be profiling
your release build.
Turn on all your optimizations,
turn on any flags, do any extra work that
you would normally do.
With one exception, you want to keep your
symbol information in,
so don't strip those.
Simply so that when you
see your results in Shark,
you can still see all your
symbol names and your source code
and that sort of information.
Now, when you're looking at
a performance problem,
you want to start out
by picking a metric,
some way to quantify its performance
so that after every code change,
you can measure it and see if you
actually did get a performance benefit.
What this metric is will, of course,
depend on what problem you're
looking at and what your application
does and various factors,
but typical things are, of course,
response time, throughput, frame rate.
Having picked one of these,
you then want to go and
take a baseline measurement.
Now, this step's really about
coming up with a benchmark,
some kind of sequence of steps
or data that you use with your
program that you can go and run
again in a repeatable manner so
that every time you make a change,
you can rerun this little benchmark
and see how the performance varies.
I want to point out here,
although we're not going to
really cover it in this session,
that Shark can be automated
in a lot of different ways.
So you can integrate it with your scripts
and with your programs and do all sorts
of automated testing and profiling.
If you want to know more about that,
check out the Shark manual.
There's a whole section on it.
Also, we talked about this in more detail
in the advanced session on Tuesday.
Of course, if you missed that,
you can check it out on ADC on
iTunes after the conference.
So these are the things
that you should do first.
There's also some things that you're
going to need to know in order
to really use Shark effectively.
Now, it's true that Shark is
actually really easy to use.
We go to a lot of effort
to make this true.
But it does produce a lot of data.
So knowing how to refine it to focus
it in on just your particular issue.
Is really important.
And this really boils
down to three things.
First up is knowing which configuration
to use for a given problem.
Second is knowing how to focus
Shark at just the part of the
system that's of interest.
And the third thing is having gotten your
results using Shark's data mining tools.
To focus in on just the parts of
your program and the execution
that are actually relevant
and that you care about.
Now, we're going to cover all
of these in this session.
So you'll have this down pat by the end.
But there's one thing that you
also need to know that we can't
really fit into one session.
Which is how to interpret your results.
This basically boils down to experience.
It's like debugging or
programming in general.
It's just a matter of learning
and having dealt with similar
problems and building on those.
So the best way, of course,
to do this is to experiment.
You know, go into Shark.
Try different configurations.
Try different programs.
Look at different problems.
Change your code.
See how it affects your performance.
You know, play around.
You can also talk to other people.
And we're going to do some demos
later in this session to effectively.
show you some common problems and
how you're going to fix them and
give you a bit of a jump start.
All right, so that's what you should do
first and what you need to know.
So let's go in and I'll
introduce you to Shark.
So we'll just switch to the demo machine.
So, the other demo machine.
Thank you, Ryan.
So, fire up Shark.
I'll just hide that for the moment.
So, when you launch Shark,
this is the main window.
This is what you see first.
Now, this is where you choose what
profiling technique you're going
to use and the scope of it,
and also, of course,
control profiling with the
start and stop button here.
The first menu is the configuration.
This is the profiling technique and
analysis techniques you're going to use.
You can see here that there's
a whole bunch of these.
We'll just go with time profile for now.
The second menu is the scope.
You can see there's three options here.
You can choose to profile everything,
which is the whole system,
so you can see everything running at,
you know, maybe the expense of a
little more overhead.
You can choose to profile
a specific process,
which is really good.
It's lower overhead, so if you're just
interested in your program,
then you can do that.
And for some configurations,
you can even profile a binary file on
disk without even having to run it.
Now, if you choose to profile
a particular process,
the window expands and you get
a list of processes to target.
I'd like to point out that
this is a very simple process.
You can choose to profile a binary file
on disk without even having to run it.
And I'd like to point out just
quickly that this is how you would
go about launching a process as well.
This will then,
when you click the start button,
having chosen launch,
it'll put up a dialog and you
can set your executable path,
your arguments and all
that sort of stuff.
Now, I've got a demo application
here that I want to use,
and we'll get to this a little
bit in detail a little later,
but first up, I'll just show it to you.
So what it is is an MPEG-2 decoder that
we just downloaded off the Internet.
Thank you.
And I'll just build it and
run it so you can see it.
And we just slapped a real
simple Cocoa GUI on it so
it would display movies.
And we want to use this to
display HD MPEG-2 movies.
So I have a test movie here.
I'll just pull that up and we'll
play that so you can see it.
So this is one of the astronauts up
on the International Space Station.
He's cruising around.
He's having fun.
Unfortunately, he's cruising a little
slower than I'd like,
because this is a
30-frame-per-second video.
And you can see here,
we're only getting 22 frames a second.
So that's obviously our
performance problem,
and that's also our
metric we're going to use.
We want to get up to 30
frames a second or beyond.
Now, this is where we fire up Shark.
We choose our process,
our MPEG-2 decoder,
and we start profiling.
So we click Start.
Shark's doing its sampling.
We give it a few seconds
to collect some samples.
That's plenty.
So we'll stop it,
and we can stop our movie now.
And now it's doing its analysis.
This is where it goes through
and crunches the numbers
and looks at the data,
and it pulls symbol information
out of your binaries,
so it can display those to you later.
And when it's done this,
it'll produce a session window,
which is where you spend your time
looking at what your program's
doing and making your optimizations.
So when it does that, in a few seconds,
please.
Thank you.
So here we have a session window.
Now, before I go in and we start
optimizing this program,
I want to jump back to slides and talk
about what a time profile actually is.
how it works, and how you can use it.
So, I mentioned briefly, I mean,
you saw in the configuration menu,
there's a whole bunch of
them that you can use.
I'm only going to cover, well,
we're only going to cover
the main three today,
the three most common ones that
will get most of what you need done.
We're also going to do a little
call out to some of our Java tracing
options towards the end.
But if you want to know more, as I said,
play around with Shark or read the manual
or check out the advanced session where
we covered some additional configurations
and system trace in more detail.
[Transcript missing]
All right, so that's time profile
and how you use it.
What are the advantages and why
would you want to use time profile as
compared to other profiling techniques?
Well, in its favor,
time profile is really easy.
It requires no work on your part,
no code changes, no recompilation,
nothing at all.
In fact, you don't even need the
developer tools installed,
just Shark,
so even end users can use time profile.
So that's one good thing,
it's really easy.
The second thing is those call
stacks we were talking about,
they're accurate right down
to the instruction level.
So you can see exactly where you were
at that particular moment in time.
And the third good thing,
which is really the most important,
is that it's really low overhead.
On a modern machine,
less than a percent of CPU,
a few megabytes of RAM, really nothing.
And this has the important
consequence that it doesn't
generally affect your profiling.
And this is a really important point.
I can't overstress this enough.
You really want to be profiling,
as I said before,
what the end user is going to see.
Now, if your profiling technique that
you're using has really high overhead,
that's going to impact your program.
And so you're no longer really
seeing what the end user is seeing.
You're kind of seeing something else.
And you can go in and make
changes then that look good,
but then aren't actually what
you want when you go and run them
on a standalone end user system.
So low overhead is a really,
really good thing.
Of course, you know,
all these things don't
come without a trade-off.
There is a con.
And that brings us to the main
disadvantage of time profiling,
which is that it's not exact.
It's not telling you every
single function call,
every single line of code executed.
It's just a statistical method.
So let's take an example.
Here we have a program running,
and the white lines here are where
Shark has come in and taken a sample.
So from Shark's point of view,
what the program was
doing was actually this.
Now,
you can see that this is quite different.
There's two real problems here.
First, in the first half,
Shark has come in and sampled on
either side of these functions.
So it didn't see them at all.
It doesn't think they happened.
On the other hand, these functions happen
to fall on a sample,
but they may not have actually
been running for very long.
But Shark doesn't know that,
so it just assumes they were
running for the whole interval.
And you can see that the
result is kind of like,
well, that's not what my program's doing.
I mean, how is this going to be helpful,
right?
Luckily, because these are opposites,
when you get enough samples,
they average out,
and time profile still gives
you an accurate picture of what
your program is actually doing.
Now, the default sampling rate for
time profile is 1 kilohertz,
1,000 times a second.
Now, that's actually pretty high.
And for most programs,
nearly all of them,
that's going to give you an
accurate picture of what's going on.
If you find yourself
sort of cranking that up,
you know,
thinking that you need to make it higher,
and especially if you're
going right up to the limit,
you probably don't actually
want to use time profile.
You probably want to try
different techniques,
such as function tracing or system trace.
And we'll get to system trace
in the second half of this talk.
But let's focus on time profile.
So you saw before at the end of
our little brief demo that this is
what a Shark session looks like,
and this is a time profile.
So you have these tabs at the top,
and we're looking at profile by default.
And this shows you your call stacks.
Now, when it first opens,
it's in heavy mode,
and this is showing you the
tops of your call stacks,
the leafs of the call trees.
And this is a really
great place to start,
because straightaway,
it's answering the question,
what code is executing?
What is my program actually doing?
Furthermore, since it's sorted,
you can see that the functions that are
executing most go straight to the top.
And this is where you play
a game of whack-a-mole.
You focus in on the functions
at the top and just ignore,
for the moment at least,
everything below,
because they don't matter.
This is a great way of
looking from the bottom up.
You're going straight to where
you're actually executing,
and by clicking on the
disclosure triangles,
you can trace back through the
callers to see how you got there,
you know,
all the way back from your main function.
However, sometimes you kind of want
to look at it the other way.
You want to start from your main function
and sort of work down from there,
you know, see what main called,
where its time was divided,
and then look down to the next level,
where the time went there,
and sort of work your
way down instead of up.
This is the standard TreeView,
which we just call TreeView.
This is a really good way of looking
at things for a couple of reasons,
but mainly because it
shows you different ways,
different code paths you can
use to reach a given function.
For example,
the square root function here.
You can see it's called in two
completely different code paths.
This is important from an optimization
perspective because how you optimize
that function may depend or may
be completely different for one
code path as opposed to another.
In Shark, of course,
the tree view looks like this,
just the outline view, like a heavy view.
Now,
we got here by going to the View menu
down here and choosing Tree.
You can also, from there,
choose to view both tree
and heavy view together.
If you want to look at both,
look at it from both angles.
Now,
this is all good and well for a simple
program with all of three functions,
right?
But in a real program,
these views get really busy.
You have a lot of different functions,
your call tree is very large,
there's all different code paths,
and it can quickly get to a
point where the parts that are
interesting are obscured by
parts that really don't matter.
This is where Shark's
data mining comes in.
For example,
we had this call tree before,
and we've got these trig functions here,
cos and square root,
which are from the system's math library.
This is a library that
comes with the system,
so it's something that you as third-party
developers can't actually change,
and it's already pretty
well optimized anyway,
right?
So you really don't care about that.
What you're interested in is
how you're using that library.
So you'd rather get rid of these
functions and just take their
samples and push them up into
their callers in your code.
And then you have a
much simpler call tree,
and you can still see
where the time was going,
but you don't have to
deal with all the details.
Now,
that's just an example of one data mining
technique called charging to callers.
Shark has a whole host of
other ones you can use,
but we don't have time, unfortunately,
in this session to go through them.
They were covered in the
advanced session on Tuesday,
and they're also in the manual.
So that's one good way of looking at your
time profile results using call stacks.
Another way is using the chart view.
This simply shows your program's
execution over time where the
y-axis is the call stack depth.
And this actually turns out to be
a really good way of seeing how
your execution changes over time,
the different phases of execution
your program goes through.
For example,
you can see here on the left,
the first 400 samples,
your program's doing something.
I mean, it has some sort of pattern.
But over here,
it's doing something else entirely.
It's got a completely different pattern.
And in between,
there's these spires where
something else crazy is going on.
And the red here actually
denotes kernel time.
So this is probably a
system call we made,
and it's doing some work on our behalf.
Of course, you can zoom in on these,
so you can get a closer look and a
better feel for what's going on using
either the zoom slider or simply by
drag selecting the area of interest.
And that can take you right down into
the individual samples themselves.
If you click on one of those,
it highlights, as you can see.
And over here on the right,
you can see the call stack
for that particular sample.
This is a great way to see
what your program is doing at
that particular moment in time.
Now, so far we've shown that you can get
down to the individual functions.
Now, that's really good for finding
out where your time is going.
But knowing which function is
executing may not be enough to help
you figure out why it's taking so long.
For that,
what you can do is just double click
on a function anywhere you see it in a
profile view or a call stack somewhere,
and that will open a tab with a source
code for that function and go straight
to the lines in that function where
you're spending most of your time.
You can see on the left here that
we have the breakdown by line of how
much time is being spent on each one,
and there's also the color coding.
So straight away you can see
what the hottest code is,
where you're spending all your time.
This color coding also extends to
the scroll bar over on the right,
so you can navigate around large
functions or large files with
lots of different hotspots.
At this point,
you may have figured out why your
function is running so slow and
you want to go in and fix it.
You can simply click the
Edit button to open it in Xcode or
whatever your favorite editor is,
and then go and make your changes.
Alternatively,
you may not still know at this
point why this is so slow,
so you know now what line is slow,
but you might still think, well, okay,
say here we have some floating point.
Well, that looks sort of okay.
I mean, what's slow about it, right?
To get a closer look,
you can click on the Assembly button
to toggle to the Assembly view,
and now you can see down
to the instruction level
where your time is going.
Again, color-coded with the
percentages broken down.
And even if you're not
an Assembly person,
this can still be a great
way to figure out exactly why
a particular line is slow.
And I pointed out also,
because you may find yourself
double-clicking on a function,
and it goes straight to this.
You don't see the source code at all.
This typically happens if
you're looking at something you
don't have the source code for.
You know, a kernel function,
or a system library,
or you're an end user,
and you simply don't have the
source code for the application.
Now, if that's the case,
or in any other case,
and you find yourself
in this assembly view,
and you're not really sure, you know,
what it all means, that's cool,
because Shark's going
to try and help you.
You can see here that there's a
column there with an exclamation
mark and this little button in it.
This is Shark saying, hey,
I've noticed that here you're
doing something which could
be a performance problem.
If you click on it,
it'll tell you what it's seeing,
and it'll suggest a fix for you.
In this case, we've got a loop doing
some floating point code,
but using scalars, just the normal FPU.
So this is maybe something where we
could go and look at vectorizing it.
Now, the second thing that Shark does
that's helpful in this view,
if you're not familiar with it,
is if you see an instruction
that seems to be important,
but you're not sure what it does,
just select it.
And then click on the Help button
down the bottom right there.
And that'll take you straight to
the part of the instruction set
reference describing that function.
So you can read up on it.
All right,
so that's time profile from the very
top right down to the very bottom.
So let's go and use all this
in a real example to see how we
can optimize our MPEG-2 decoder.
So let's jump over to the demo machine.
Okay, so this is where we left off.
And we've got our little
time profile here.
And now we know how to use it.
So straightaway we can see that we want
to focus in on this reference IDCT.
That's simply where we're
spending most of our time.
But while we're here,
I'd just like to point out
that floor is also showing up.
This is the standard
floor in the math library.
And it's kind of odd that it
would be showing up so much.
And Shark kind of agrees
with this intuition.
It's offering us a tip here.
If we click on this,
it's saying that because
we're using floor so much,
maybe we're interested
in this alternative.
So we're going to use
the alternative version,
which isn't quite as accurate,
but it's a little bit faster.
So we thought, well, all right,
we'll give that a shot, see if it works.
So we copied that into our program,
took nearly 30 seconds to do.
And that gave us this
version of our decoder.
Well, that's not bad.
I mean, you can see now we're getting 25,
26 frames a second up from, what was it,
22 before.
So that's pretty good.
That's a 15, 20% improvement from a
30-second code change.
I was pretty happy with that.
But it's still not playing
We want to play in real-time.
We want 30 frames a second.
So we're going to have
to do some more work.
Let's go back to our profile and go
into this Reference IDCT function
and see what's going on.
So I just double-clicked on it.
And oops.
We'll go to the source view.
So now you can see --
hopefully you can see.
I'll just increase the font size for you.
Now you can see what
this function is doing.
It's just spending all this time
inside these loops doing all
this floating-point arithmetic.
We looked at this for a minute or two
and we came to -- we realized two things.
The first thing is it's taking as
its input and its output -- it's the
same thing -- an array of shorts,
integers.
But it's converting these to doubles,
doing its arithmetic using
the floating-point unit,
and then converting it
back to integers as output.
Now, this is slow in a lot of ways.
The conversion is slow.
The floating-point is slower than
the equivalent integer arithmetic.
And when we actually look at this,
There's no actual floating
point values here.
These are all integers, whole values.
So we could get exactly the same
result using integer arithmetic.
We figured we'd give that a
shot and see if it actually
made a performance difference.
And that gave us this version.
Well, now you can see that that did
make a big performance difference.
We finally got more
than 30 frames a second.
In fact, we got 35 frames a second, 34.
So that's really cool.
Now our movie's playing back
in better than real time,
and we can watch it
all nice and smoothly.
Unfortunately, I cheated a bit.
I thought we were going to have a
smaller screen on our projector,
so I actually shrank the movie
down so it's not even a 720p.
It turns out,
if we go and play it in 720p,
it's still not running
quite smoothly enough.
So let's go back and see what
other changes we can make.
I said there were two things before.
The second thing we noticed,
and Shark is even pointing it out for us,
is that here we have some
loops doing some math.
This is a classical sort of
case of where you want to
look at vectorizing something.
We had one of our engineers go in.
He spent about a day on it.
He looked into it.
He figured out how to vectorize it.
and we thought, well,
this is going to be great.
You know, vectorization is awesome.
Everyone tells you, you vectorize things,
it'll make it four times faster.
It'll be fantastic.
So we went in and we did that,
and that gave us this version.
Huh.
40 frames a second, I mean, it's better.
It's faster.
It's not four times faster.
So that didn't really
work the way we expected.
And this is the point where
our expectations fell apart.
We made a change we thought was going
to have some really good benefit,
and it didn't.
So we need to go in and
reorientate ourselves,
get our bearings again,
and try and figure out what's
going on and why that change
didn't work as expected.
So you take another time profile.
So I'll play a movie.
I'll jump over to Shark again,
and we'll take another time profile.
Again, just a few seconds is plenty
for something like this.
So we'll stop that.
Shark will do its analysis again.
It'll be a bit faster this
time because we've already got
our symbol information handy.
And when that pops up,
hopefully we'll be able to figure out why
that optimization apparently didn't work.
When it pops up, please.
Any moment now.
We do Shark Shark as well,
so it works on itself.
There we go.
All right.
I'll just crank up the
volume -- font size again.
So this isn't obvious because
we renamed the function,
but what used to be reference IDCT,
our integer vectorized
version is this iweight IDCT.
So you can see that this is actually now
taking up 1.8% from 20-something before.
So it's actually an order
of magnitude faster.
So it turns out our
vectorization did work.
It worked really, really well,
except it worked so well that now this
function is not taking up any time,
so the benefit is comparatively tiny.
What we need to do instead is
refocus on these functions up here,
which are now taking up most of our time.
Now, these first two in
particular are very similar,
and if I just double-click
on one and go into it,
you can see that,
like our previous function,
this is just some math in a loop.
And again, this is something that could
probably be vectorized really well.
It turns out in this particular decoder,
there are a lot of different
places where you can vectorize it.
So our vectorization was working.
We just didn't do enough of it.
So we had an engineer, he sat down,
he spent another three
or four days on it.
He went through and he vectorized
functions one after another,
you know, starting with the slowest ones.
And long story short,
that gave us this version.
Now that's more like it, right?
We're getting over 100 frames a second.
This is the kind of benefit that
everyone promises with vectorization.
So that's really cool.
We were really happy with that.
We can now play our huge
1080p movies really smoothly.
That was great.
All right, so that's how we optimize
that particular program.
What I'd like to do while I'm also
here is show you how you can do the
same sort of thing on an iPhone.
Now, we don't have time for a full demo,
but I just want to show you the important
bits in order to profile on an iPhone.
So first up,
in order to actually get to the phone,
you go up to the sampling menu and
choose Network/iPhone Profiling.
This adds to Shark's main window,
this little list here you can see,
which will show up any connected
iPhones or iPod Touches,
and also any Macs you have on
the network in remote mode.
So to use the phone for profiling,
you click on Use.
This will go to the phone, launch Shark,
get it ready for profiling,
get it configured,
and then you can choose which
configuration you want to use,
which profiling technique,
and also the scope of the profiling,
much like these pop-up menus from before.
And you can control profiling on the
phone using the Start and Stop button.
Now, I mentioned we didn't have
time to go through this,
so I just had a session
that I prepared earlier,
so we can just open it straight away.
I took a profile of a particular
application I was working on,
which is just drawing a sine wave.
So I can actually show it to you here.
I'll launch it in the simulator.
It's a really simple app.
I was just interested in getting an
idea on OpenGL performance on the phone.
So we'll build that.
When it runs, there it is.
So very, very simple.
But on the phone,
it was running a little slower
than I thought it should be.
So I took a time profile
to see why it was,
you know, what it was doing,
why it was so slow.
And that gave me this.
Now, you can see this is okay.
We've got some symbols
for our system libraries.
But for our application, we've got this.
No symbols, just instruction addresses.
That's not very helpful.
This is because when Xcode installs
your application on the phone,
it removes all the symbol information.
It's trying to save space because
the phone doesn't have much space.
That's not really convenient for us.
But luckily,
you can always add it in afterwards.
So you go up to the file
menu and choose symbolicate.
That brings up a dialog where you can
select the original binary on your Mac,
the one that still has
symbols info in it.
And you just open that.
And Shark can pull the symbol
information out of that.
And you can see now that we
can see what's actually going
on inside our application.
what's actually going
on inside our program.
[Transcript missing]
And I'll just search for it here.
Compile for Thumb.
So this is telling Xcode that it's
allowed to generate thumb code.
By turning this off,
and I rebuilt it and put
it back on the phone,
I went from about 30 frames a
second to 40 frames per second.
I was pretty happy with that.
33% for unticking a checkbox.
I like these kind of optimizations.
Now,
There's a lot more to it than that.
There's a lot more optimizations
that I made to this program.
Unfortunately, I mentioned we don't have
time to go into them now.
This is a demo for another time.
So let's just jump back to our slides
and wrap up what we've done so far.
So in the first half of that demo,
I showed you how we used Time Profile
to optimize our MPEG-2 decoder.
And just by following
that iterative process,
focusing in on one function at a
time and optimizing them in turn,
we ended up running, what was it,
nearly five times faster.
So that was pretty cool.
We were very happy with that.
In the second half of the demo,
you saw how I used Shark to
Time Profile on an iPhone.
Now, these are the takeaway
points from that demo.
Some of them I explained in the demo.
You know, you need to add search paths so
Shark can see your symbol information.
There's also a couple I just
want to talk to briefly.
The second point is kind of important.
On a Mac, Shark's overhead is tiny,
like I mentioned.
But on a phone,
it's a much less powerful system.
But Shark still needs to
do the same amount of work,
so its overhead is significantly higher.
This is just important
to remember in terms of,
you know,
try to profile just your application.
Don't profile the whole
system if you can avoid it.
Don't crank up the sample
rate to crazy levels,
things like that.
The third point is also important.
I mentioned before that you should always
be profiling your release build so you're
seeing what the end user is seeing.
On the phone with the ARM processor,
this is particularly important because
GCC's code generation between unoptimized
and optimized varies very widely,
to put it politely.
So you really want to be
using your optimized version.
Otherwise,
you're probably not going to be seeing
what's actually going to be happening.
The fourth point,
I mentioned the ARM versus Thumb thing.
I just unchecked that box,
which changed my entire program
from using Thumb code to using ARM.
You can also go in using these compiler
flags and change this on a per file basis
using the info inspector for a file.
So that's a great way to selectively
choose which instruction set you use
for different parts of your program.
The last point is simply, as you saw,
the phone is kind of a new device.
It's a new architecture.
It's a new type of system.
The performance problems you have on
it are going to be quite different to
what you may be familiar with on a Mac.
And they're probably going to
require some original solutions.
So this is just an acknowledgment of
the fact that even if you're familiar
with performance work on a Mac,
this might be like going back to school
a little bit once you move to the iPhone.
Now, the other thing we saw in the demo,
just as a last point,
is you saw me open a saved session file.
So, yes, Shark sessions can be saved,
and they can be copied
between any machine,
Intel to PowerPC to ARM, whatever.
There's no end in this
issues or anything like that.
They just work.
Now, they include, of course,
the sample information you took,
obviously.
They also include any data
mining settings you had active
when you saved the session.
All right.
But they can also include your symbol
information and your source code.
Now, this is really cool because it means
the session file is self-contained.
You can delete your source code,
rebuild your application,
move to another machine, whatever.
When you open the session,
it's still going to look exactly
the same as when you took it.
It'll still have all the information.
Of course,
if you're going to send the session
file to someone and you don't want
them to have this information,
you need to not include it to begin with.
Luckily, this is easy to remember.
When you go to save a session,
Shark will pop down a sheet,
which will give you the choice
of whether you want to include
that information or not.
So if you're going to
send this to someone,
you don't want them having the info,
remember to click strip.
As we saw also in the iPhone demo,
even if you get a session file
that doesn't have that information,
you can always add it in again later.
So that's not really an issue.
Now, obviously you can use Shark session
files just so you can save them
and you can come back later
and continue working on them.
But there's another
two good uses of this.
The first up is that you can take
these as an end user or as a developer
if you're sending them to someone
else and send them in alongside your
performance problem reports so that
even if the person who gets your bug
report can't reproduce the problem,
it might be an intermittent issue or
requires some special configuration,
they'll still be able
to open the session,
see what the program is doing
when the problem does occur,
and that may be enough for
them to figure out what's
going on and how to improve it.
In fact,
that's what we at Apple recommend if
you're sending performance bugs into us.
Grab a Shark session if you can,
because that helps us immensely when
trying to figure out what's going on.
And the last point is going
back to that whole methodical
approach to performance analysis.
Use your Shark session files
to document your progress.
Every time you make a change,
take a new time profile or whatever
you're using and record that.
So you can go back and
see each step of the way,
okay, we made this change,
this is what the performance change was,
and so on and so forth.
All right.
That's time profile,
and that's how to use Shark.
But that's, while very useful,
certainly not the only
thing that Shark can do.
I mentioned one other thing before,
system trace, that is also very useful.
And to talk about that,
I'd like to welcome
on stage my colleague,
Ryan Du Bois.
Thank you, Wade.
As he said, my name is Ryan Du Bois,
and I'm here to talk about system trace.
So by now,
you've gained a general familiarity
with time profile and how it can be
useful in tracking down your CPU cycles.
Where are they going?
Oftentimes, however,
that's not the complete
picture you're looking for.
That tells you one part of the piece.
But what if, for example,
you just added multithreading
to your application?
What kind of tools do we have
that allow you to look into that?
That's where System Trace comes in.
System Trace allows you to get a new
understanding of the multi-threaded
behavior of your application.
It gives you visibility into how
your application interacts with OS X.
It even lets you view things like virtual
memory behavior in a very visual way,
so you can begin to understand that.
So let's take a quick look at how
it's different from Time Profile.
And a Time Profile, as Wade said,
will come in periodically
and ask your program,
hey, what are you doing?
Now in this example here,
you see that that red chunk
of system code is completely
missed by Time Profile.
That's that sampling error
that Wade was talking about.
System Trace, on the other hand,
is an exact trace of every single
operating system event that happens
during the course of profiling.
So we don't miss a thing.
And this happens for every single thread
running in the system all at once.
The really beautiful part
about this is you don't need to
alter your programs in any way.
You don't have to change
any instrumentation,
do any of that stuff.
It just works.
So when you take a system trace,
it'll be presented with three main views.
The first one here is the summary view.
We also have the Trace
View and the Timeline View.
So let's talk about these
a little more in depth.
The Summary View, as the name implies,
is just kind of an overall
summary of what was going on
during that profiling session.
In the upper right here,
you see kind of a general
breakdown of your CPU time,
how much was spent in user code,
how much was spent in system code,
how much was doing actual work,
and how much was idle.
In the upper left here,
we break it down even further
with a nifty little pie chart,
breaking it into system calls, VM faults,
driver time interrupts, and idle time.
Down below, you'll see three tabs.
These are the more detailed
views of the summary.
The first one here is the scheduler tab.
This gives you kind of summary statistics
for all the thread scheduling decisions
made during the course of profiling.
So as you see here, we can organize these
statistics by busy time,
user time, system time,
and even dynamic priority of
your threads as they're running.
The next tab over is
the system call profile.
This looks very much like a timed
profile with the exception that it's
a profile of every single system call
made during the course of profiling.
Now, just like a time profile,
you can switch between heavy and
tree view using a little pop-up here.
And the real power here is using
these disclosure triangles,
you can walk back from each and
every system call back to the
line of code in your application
where that system call came from.
So, for example,
you make a couple OpenGL calls,
you're not sure if they're going
to result in a system call.
System trace now gives you that
visibility into your application.
And the third tab is the VM fault tab.
This is just like the system call tab.
It's an exact profile of
every VM fault that happened.
And again,
using the little disclosure triangles,
you can walk back into your
function and your line of code,
which causes VM faults.
The next main view I want to
talk about is the trace view.
As the name implies,
this is a complete list of all
the traced events that happen
during the course of profiling.
Now, if you're looking at system calls,
for example,
we give you all the arguments to
every system call made right here.
You poke this little button there,
and the little pane will slide open,
and you can see the full call stack
for each and every system call as
you're walking through the trace.
Now, that's really cool,
and that gives you a lot of detail,
but it doesn't really
give you a visual picture.
So for that, if you double-click on any
one of these system calls,
it'll take you right to
that in the timeline view,
which looks like this.
As the name implies,
it's a graph of all your threads
over time and what they're doing.
Now you can navigate this view using
the interactive zoomer up here,
which will zoom in on the timeline view,
and the scroll bar below.
And as I said before,
we record trace events for every
single thread in the system at once.
So down at the bottom here,
we give you some options for filtering
that down to just your process.
So I'd like to take a brief interlude
here and talk about some advanced
settings when using System Trace.
I find it very helpful when
doing a System Trace to pop open
the Advanced Settings drawer.
That gives you a couple extra
options for your visualizations.
First one I'd like to talk
about is the thread coloring
options up at the top here.
Before I move on, however,
you can get to this by going to Window,
Show Advanced Settings, just so you know.
So here's that timeline view.
Each one of these little colored
rectangles represents the time that
any given thread was running on a CPU.
By default, as you can see here,
they're all colored the same yellow.
And that doesn't really tell
us what was running where.
We have three different ways to add
colors to these thread run intervals to
make them more visually understandable.
The first one I'd like to
talk about is color by CPU.
Now this is the one that
I find myself using the most.
So it's the default
setting on my machine.
Let's see how this can help
us visualize multi-threaded
behavior of our application.
So if we focus in on these
four Noble Ape threads here,
these are worker threads for an
application that's supposed to be
doing some CPU intensive calculations.
And we went and added multi-threading
and wanted to make sure that
they were sharing all four cores,
just kind of do a sanity check.
And that's what this system trace is.
Now, if we look right here,
using these coloring options,
we can see at a glance that all four
of these worker threads are sharing all
four cores in this machine pretty well.
That's good news.
That's what we expected.
However,
if we look a little bit to the right,
we notice the color green
disappears from those threads.
And furthermore,
we notice two of them are
fighting for the same core.
And that's maybe going to
mess up some cache locality,
maybe cause a big performance hit.
And just by using that color down here,
we can identify which thread
came in and started running.
The next option I'd like to
talk about is color by priority.
In case you weren't aware,
the priority of each thread in your
system gets adjusted dynamically over
time according to what it's doing.
Using the timeline view
and color by priority,
you can see how those adjustments were
made for each one of your threads.
So for example, here, these bottom three
threads are high priority,
and that's denoted by kind
of a pinkish-red color.
And just above it,
you can see three hourglass threads
here running at low priority,
blue color.
The final option I'd like to talk about
is color by context switch reason.
So every thread, when it stops running,
stops running for one
of these five reasons.
And just at a glance,
you can kind of get a handle on,
are these threads making a
lot of blocking system calls?
Are they getting preempted?
Are they just running out of time?
Just at a glance with the timeline view.
The next set of options I want to talk
about is the event selection here.
So here we have a list of the icons
that will show in the timeline view,
and you can turn each
one of these on and off.
So let's go back to that
timeline view and let's see
what else we can get out of it.
Remember each one of those run intervals.
If you click on one of those,
you'll get a little inspector that'll
give you a lot more information about it.
How much time was spent in user mode?
How much in system mode?
Why did it stop running?
What was its priority
when it stopped running?
Now,
if you turn on some of those event icons,
they will show up in these
run intervals telling you
what those threads were doing.
Here we see a normal system call.
The little underbar represents how
long that it was running on the CPU.
Just above you can see
a blocking system call,
and I think you'll notice the underbar
extends beyond the end of one run
interval on into the next one.
Now,
if you were to click on any one of these,
you'll get another inspector.
It looks slightly different.
This gives you the full call stack
of where that system call came from.
Down below there,
you can see all the arguments
to it and its return value even.
So if you have an error case,
you can click on it in the timeline
view and see the return value.
Also, in the bottom left there,
you can see how much time was spent
blocked waiting on whatever resource
that system call was called for.
Now we have three main types of
system calls we display icons for.
You can see them here, BSD, Mach,
and MIG messages.
One thing I'd like to
call out is the lock icon.
Now this happens any time your
Pthread mutex operations result
in a system call to the kernel.
So that's not going to be every
single Pthread mutex lock or unlock,
but just the ones that happen
as a result of lock contention.
So if you see that show
up in your timeline view,
you know you've got some lock contention
going on that you need to track down.
So again, here's those page faults.
Here you see a couple of zero fills.
Again, more information there.
If you click on them,
you'll get a little inspector
that'll show you the full call stack,
in this case very short.
It'll show you the address
and the size of the page.
And it'll even tell you if it was
a code fault by telling you which
library was faulting a page in there.
As you can see,
we display icons for a number
of different VM fault types.
My personal favorite is copy on right,
little cow skin icon.
We also show icons for interrupts
that happen on the processors.
These happen for a number of reasons.
I/O operations, DMAs,
the timer interrupts used
to enforce a time quantum.
As I said before,
you don't need to add any
instrumentation to your application,
but you can if you're interested.
We have two ways to do that.
They're both signposts.
The first one is called a point signpost.
You can think of this as
kind of like a print F.
Your program kind of
raises its hand and says,
"Hey, this is what I'm doing right now."
The other kind is an interval signpost,
which again shows up with that
little underbar that tells you
how long any given operation took.
And with each one of these,
you can record four auxiliary values,
whatever you like, and you can put these
in your code anywhere,
in your user application,
in your driver even.
To see how to do that,
check out the Shark manual.
There's a couple of really
good examples in there.
Or after the conference,
check out the video of the advanced
session that happened on Tuesday.
So with that, let's go into a little
quick demo of System Trace.
See how we can use it to
visualize the multi-threaded
behavior of an application.
So here's Shark window here.
You can find system trace
about the fourth position over
here in the config pop-up.
Let me go ahead and get
my demo set up here.
All right, so I have this video camera
that unfortunately records
direct-to-DVD format.
It's kind of a pain for me because I want
to watch these on my home computer,
maybe even take them on my iPod.
So I'm using an application
here some of you may be
familiar with called Handbrake.
And what it does is it transcodes
video from one format to another.
In this case, I'm going to be looking
at the X264 encoder,
which if you go read
documentation online,
says that it's multi-threaded.
So on these eight-core machines,
it should go pretty fast.
So what I'm going to do is just start
to encode this video that I've taken.
And again,
using that whole performance workflow,
I'm going to write down the metric,
which is going to be the frames
per second right over here.
And it looks like it reaches
steady state right around 126,
127.
Now I'm going to go ahead and take a
system trace using the hotkey here,
Option Escape.
And that starts,
and you'll notice that starts,
the icon down there changes to red.
I'm going to go ahead and pause
this while Shark is processing.
In fact, I'll even quit it.
Shark gives you a little progress bar,
tell you how far along
it is in its processing.
All right, so here's our system trace.
This is the summary tab
I was talking about.
And immediately,
something should jump out at you here.
You see that this is supposed to
be a CPU-intensive application.
It's supposed to be using as many
cycles as possible to transcode this
video from one format to another.
Problem I see here is
we have 45% idle time.
That's a lot of time sitting
around doing nothing when we
could be working on this video.
So let's go see if we can kind of
get a handle on what's going on.
If we click that little
disclosure triangle,
it'll show us all the
threads in this application.
You notice there's quite a few.
Nothing too exciting there.
Let's go over and check
out the system calls.
All right, the first one here,
these are kind of interesting.
They don't really have a name,
but if you open up their call stack,
you see that they're
coming from Thread Start.
Another way to see that is
by clicking this button here.
It'll pull out the full call stack.
So what this is telling me here
is our x264 encoder is kicking off
threads and maybe joining them later,
and it's doing this really fast,
probably once for each frame.
So the problem here on OS X,
it takes about 90 microseconds
of time to make a new thread.
So we're bleeding all that time
for every single frame of encoding.
So realizing this,
I went in and tried to optimize that.
Now I'm just going to go ahead
and give you a quick tour of this
over here in the trace view too.
Switch over to the system calls here.
There's one of those without a name,
BSD system call.
Again, you can poke this button
to see the full call stack.
Now what I'm going to do is double click
on this and go to the timeline view.
Now again,
you'll notice that's really busy,
and it's all the same color.
It's not telling us a
whole lot of information.
So let's go to window,
show advanced settings.
- Let's scroll all the way up here,
and we'll enable thread coloring.
There we go.
So now at a glance,
we can see which threads were
running on which CPUs at which time.
It was very useful.
Now again, I said it would take
me right to that event,
but I'm not exactly sure where it is.
So I'm going to press Enter.
There it is.
And it gives me the pop-up,
that little inspector for the
event that is highlighted.
That pops right up to the front there.
So let's go ahead and zoom in on that.
And let's use these filtering options
here to just look at Handbrake.
And let's see if we can
find this new thread.
So here's our call-- oh, this is an exit.
All right, let's find the other one.
Here it is.
So there's the thread
creation system call.
Let's see if we can find where that
thread comes in and how long it took.
So there's the whole call stack.
Here's how much CPU time it took,
77 microseconds there.
And there it looks like the first thread.
So you can see the big delay chunk
here between where we asked for
a new thread to be created and
where it actually starts running.
And with System Trace,
we didn't have to do anything
to our application to
measure this amount of time.
All right.
So that's all well and good.
I spent about a week working
with the source code here,
mainly because I'd never seen it before.
I wasn't too familiar
with how it was working.
And I made it so that these
worker threads that it's
using to share all the CPUs,
they stick around when
they're done with the work,
and they wait for the main thread to say,
"Hey, here's another frame to
work on." So I was thinking,
if I can get rid of this 80-ish
microseconds of overhead,
maybe I can get some
more frames per second.
So let's go ahead and do
another encoding here.
So I'm going to start it.
Let's overwrite that.
And again,
I'm going to start it with that hot key.
There it goes.
Let's go ahead and quit this application,
give Shark all of the CPU power it needs.
We'll wait for that session to come up.
Oh, yeah.
Forgot to show you this.
One main thing I wanted
to show you here was--
There we go.
After spending all that
time working with it,
what did I get out of it
with the frames per second?
Not a whole lot.
It's still, in fact,
it even looks about a
frame per second worse.
So let's see if we can
figure out why that is.
So I'm just going to go ahead and
jump right to the timeline here.
Again, you can see that idle
time is still pretty high.
The thing that jumps out at
me at the timeline here was,
whoa, look at that.
Over here on the left,
we have all of these worker threads
sharing the CPUs reasonably well.
But over on the right there,
we've got that one thread just
doing whatever it's doing for
such a long amount of time.
It's blocking all the other threads,
preventing them from
doing their parallel work.
So just at a glance here,
we can get an idea of where
our performance issue is.
It's over in this thread that's
doing all this serial execution.
So if we can figure out why that is,
then we can go in and address that issue.
Unfortunately,
I didn't have time to do that,
so I'm gonna show you
another demo as well.
So here's an application that some
of you who've been here before are
probably familiar with called Noble Ape.
And what it does is just simulates
these apes running around the island.
It does a bunch of calculations
and simulates how many
thoughts a second it gets.
We originally got it.
We get about 2,000 ape thoughts a second.
And we spent a lot of time with time
profile to go ahead and optimize that.
And we got it up to about 14,000,
almost 15,000 ape thoughts per second.
We also went in and multithreaded it.
And we're getting up to,
what are we at there?
Topping out about 60,000
ape thoughts per second.
That's pretty good.
Now my theory here is we've done kind
of a first pass multithreading here.
So we're probably some performance
we can still pull out of it.
So let's take a quick system
trace and see what's going on.
Go, and I'm just going to quit that.
Let Shark do its processing.
Here we go.
Again,
you see that high idle time number.
That's probably not very good.
Let's go focus in on Noble Ape.
Now, we click this up.
We can see all of the
threads in the application.
These here are the worker threads
that are supposed to be sharing all
eight of the cores in the machine.
And one thing that
jumps out at me here is,
see this number here,
the average run interval,
the average amount of busy time
each one of these threads is taking?
That's really low.
It's on the order of 500 microseconds.
Now, the time quantum for any thread in
OS X is topped out at 10 milliseconds.
So these could be using a whole
lot more CPU time before blocking.
So my theory is we can probably
improve the performance by
giving them more work to do.
Now, if we go look at the timeline view,
we see kind of a regular pattern.
We see this main thread,
which doing the UI update here,
the worker threads doing
some work and synchronizing.
So if we go zoom in,
we can see a couple of
things jump out at us.
First of all,
we've got all this lock contention here.
Second of all,
[Transcript missing]
Wade on cue, coming from Noble Abe.
So that tells me they're using
the kind of work cue model,
which is pretty good in my opinion.
You have a work cue,
you have a thread attached to it,
you give it some work,
it wakes up and does it,
and then tells the cue that it's done.
That's great.
Problem is it looks like they're
not getting enough work to do
because they just run for very short
here and then go back to sleep.
So I'm going to close this session.
Long story short,
I spent some time trying to increase
the amount of work these are doing.
And I actually had to add an extra digit
here to the eight thoughts per second.
So I've got it up to 102,000
eight thoughts per second.
Now let's go take a system trace and
see what that looks like real quick.
Looks like I pressed the wrong button.
There we go.
All right, quit that.
All right, so remember,
the idle time previously
was up at 40-something.
It's now down to 20,
so we've improved that quite a bit.
If we look at Noble Ape here and
we look at its worker threads,
we notice their average run
interval is up to 5 milliseconds,
that order of magnitude,
and that's a really good improvement.
All right,
so let's go back to the slides.
All right.
So just a quick recap,
what did we see there?
When we were working with Handbrake,
we saw the worker threads were
being created and destroyed
for every single frame,
and that's kind of a lot of overhead.
So we went ahead and
removed all that overhead,
but we really didn't get
much boost out of it.
But using System Trace,
we could immediately identify why
we didn't get much boost out of it,
and that's because there was that
large chunk of serial execution
masking any performance gain that
we got out of the worker threads.
Now with Noble Ape, however,
we were able to get 1.8 speed up there,
1.8x in roughly 45 minutes of work.
And that's not bad, not having a strong
familiarity with the code.
So by now you've seen time profile
and you've seen system trace.
You've seen a couple of very powerful
ways to optimize your application.
But what happens if you're not working
on the CPU and you're not strictly
having multi-threading issues?
Maybe your performance issue is
more centered around memory usage.
Well, for that we offer Malik Trace.
Now this is easily found in
the configuration pop-up.
It's very cleverly disguised,
named Malik Trace.
What this does is it takes an exact trace
of every allocation and every destruction
of memory in your application.
So any kind of time
you call Malik or new,
free or delete, it'll show up in this.
That looks exactly like a time profile.
All the data mining options
work in much the same way.
A couple of things to notice here.
We've got the total column,
just like you do in a time profile.
So this allows you to find excessive
numbers of small allocations,
perhaps.
We also have the Alex size column here.
This is the new column
we added for Malik Trace,
which will allow you to find maybe small
numbers of really large allocations.
Now if you flip over to the chart view,
we've got this extra chart here,
which represents the change
in heap size over time.
So any bar above the midline
represents an allocation.
Any bar below represents a free.
So just by looking at this chart here,
we can get two pieces of really
key information out of it.
First, it does not look like
we're leaking any memory,
because for every bar above the midline,
we have an equally sized one below later.
The second thing is,
we see this repeating pattern
of allocate a bunch of stuff,
free a bunch of stuff.
Allocate, free.
And that makes me think,
maybe we can be reusing these buffers
instead of releasing them back to the
system and then getting them again.
If we do that,
we'd probably see a performance
speedup in this application.
The other real powerful thing
here is just like with the
system trace system call profile,
sometimes you don't know that you're
going to be making allocations.
Maybe you call a library
method and you're not sure.
Well, those will show up here.
And using the disclosure triangles,
you can walk back into the
function in your application
that called that library,
which in turn made the allocation.
Now, if that isn't quite
enough level of detail,
you can double click on that and
it'll take you right to the line
of source code in your application
where that allocation was made.
All right, so you've seen time profile.
You've seen system trace.
You've seen malloc trace.
All the Java guys in
the audience are going,
what about Java?
Well, let's talk about Java real quick.
As you're probably
beginning to understand,
Shark is a native machine profiler,
so it tells you right down
to the hardware what the
hardware is doing over time.
Now, if you were to do this
for a Java application,
that would kind of give you an
idea of what the Java VM was doing,
which isn't very useful
for your Java application.
Shark's Java profiling lifts us one
level up into the Java application.
So now we can give you meaningful
feedback into your Java classes
and what are they doing over time.
Now we've got three main analysis
techniques that we support for Java.
We have the time profile,
which looks and behaves
exactly like a time profile.
We've got the call trace,
and this is an exact function trace of
every method called in your application.
And we also have the allocation trace.
And again,
you'll notice the Alexize column
looks just like Malik trace.
So let's wrap things up here.
What have we learned
today in this session?
First of all,
Shark is a really powerful tool for
giving you performance profiling feedback
right down to the instruction level.
You've seen three main
types of profiling,
and you've seen their analogs
for what we have in the
Java VM and how it can be useful.
If you're interested in more,
check out the video of the
advanced session on ADC and
iTunes after the conference.
That's session 911.
Or feel free to send us an email.
We always love hearing
from our developers.
For more information,
contact the developer tools
or performance evangelist,
Michael Jurowicz.
His email is jurowicz at apple.com.
Also,
feel free to send us feedback directly.
You can send that to
perftools-feedback at group.apple.com.
Our whole team is on that,
and we always love
hearing from developers,
whether it be good or bad.
Again, check out sample codes
associated with these sessions,
and check out the attendee website.
For any more advanced questions
that we don't get to in Q&A,
feel free to come hit us up in
the optimization labs tomorrow.
We'll be there all day.